Last Updated on 2022-09-29

KB00008: Customizing EVA ICS updates
************************************

.. index:: setup, update

EVA ICS versions: **3.3.2**  and 3.x above

Problem
=======

The command "eva update" always updates EVA ICS to the latest version.
However, sometimes it may be required to install the particular intermediate
version e.g. for better backward compatibility or stability.

Solution
========

The problem can be solved in several ways:

Customizing the mirror
----------------------

The local `EVA ICS mirror <{DOC_URL}/install.html#serving-local-mirror>`_ can
host any version required. To modify the default update version for secondary
nodes, after running "eva mirror update" command, manually modify
"/opt/eva/mirror/eva/update_info.json" file and specify the version required.
Also, make sure the required version files are present in
"/opt/eva/mirror/eva", download missing files manually from
https://pub.bma.ai/eva3/.

EVA ICS repository URL can be set either manually with "eva update -u <URL>"
param, or by editing "/opt/eva/etc/eva_shell.ini" configuration file, or by
specifying *EVA_REPOSITORY_URL* environment variable.

Forcing "eva update" to download and install specified version
--------------------------------------------------------------

The command "eva update" can download and install any EVA ICS version
available. To specify the particular version, use
*EVA_UPDATE_FORCE_VERSION=<VER>:<BUILD>* environment variable, e.g. the command

.. code:: shell

    EVA_UPDATE_FORCE_VERSION=3.3.2:2021011501 eva update --YES

will try updating the local node to EVA ICS v3.3.2 build 2021011501.

Manually applying the update
----------------------------

Download the update script for the particular version/build from
https://pub.bma.ai/eva3/ and run it in "/opt/eva" directory with bash, e.g.:

.. code:: shell

    curl https://pub.bma.ai/eva3/3.3.2/nightly/update-2021011501.sh | bash

Note that update scripts don't bring EVA ICS node up automatically. If the
update has been failed, carefully investigate the problem and try either
re-applying it or start previous EVA ICS version manually.
