Last Updated on 2022-05-17

KB00012: Running EVA ICS under restricted users
***********************************************

.. index:: install, permissions, setup

EVA ICS versions: **3.3.2**  and 3.x above

Problem
=======

EVA ICS has built-in mechanism to run components under restricted users, which
can be configured with the included "easy-setup" script.

However, sometimes superuser is not available at all and eva-control/"eva
server" commands should be run under a restricted user, without decreasing
permissions after startup.

Solution
========

Detailed step-by-step guide
---------------------------

* stop EVA ICS ("eva server stop"). If EVA ICS is configured to be started with
  systemd (default), use "systemctl stop eva-ics" instead. If supervisord is
  used, stop EVA ICS with supervisorctl.

* Change EVA ICS directory ownership to the desired user (e.g. "chown eva
  /opt/eva")

* For systemd, edit */etc/systemd/system/eva-ics.service* file and change
  "User=" variable value to the desired user account. After, execute "systemctl
  daemon-reload". If supervisord is used, edit /etc/supervisor/conf.d/eva-*
  files and change "user" variables as well.

* start EVA ICS ("eva server start") **under the restricted user**. If EVA ICS
  is configured to be started with systemd (default), use "systemctl start
  eva-ics" instead (under root). If supervisord is used, start EVA ICS with
  supervisorctl. For EVA ICS 3.4.0 and above, do the same for eva-ics-registry
  service or supervisord program.

Automated solution
------------------

The above process can be automated with the script, which is available at

    https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alttch/eva3/VERSION/install/switch-eva-superuser

    (e.g.
    https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alttch/eva3/3.4.2/install/switch-eva-superuser
    for EVA ICS 3.4.2)

Download the script and run it as root:

.. code:: bash

    #./switch-eva-superuser <user>
    # e.g.
    ./switch-eva-superuser eva
    # if EVA ICS is installed in the director other than default /opt/eva:
    EVA_DIR=/path/to/eva ./switch-eva-superuser eva

Or run the script directly from the web, e.g. with curl:

.. code:: bash

    curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alttch/eva3/3.4.2/install/switch-eva-superuser | sh /dev/stdin eva

Starting EVA ICS during the system startup
------------------------------------------

To start EVA ICS during the system startup, use either systemd, or the shell
command:

.. code:: bash

    su - eva -c "/opt/eva/sbin/registry-control start"
    su - eva -c "/opt/eva/bin/eva server start"
